RFC Install-PowerShell (#324)
PowerShell/PowerShell-RFC: Draft-Accepted/RFCNNNN-Install-PowerShell.md

- Cross platform support

## Specification

Command name: install-powershell7

The default behavior is to install to CurrentUser scope, with the latest LTS
release of PowerShell. If the user has administrative
privilege, they can choose to install to the scope of AllUsers.

- The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh
  - If this path already exists, remove and replace.
- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh
- The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers.

The following parameters can be added by experienced PowerShell users to customize the installation.

- Parameter: Scope - overrides the default of CurrentUser and allows the user to specify the
  installation location AllUsers.
- Parameter: Channel - options Stable/Preview/LTS - allows the user to select if they want the
  current preview or LTS release.

## Syntax

The command `install-powershell7` is lower case and supports `-/--` switch options to be consistent
with other command-line tools.

```syntax
install-powershell7  [<channel option>] [<scope option>]
```

The `<channel option>` must be one of the following:

- `-Preview`
- `-Stable`

> - `-LTS`

Reviewer: > The main idea is that we didn't want parameters with arguments. To keep it simple, it only uses mutually-exclusive option switches.

I think it's likely easier to implement options with arguments than checking for mutually-exclusive.

Author: I was trying to avoid something like -channel:stable for simplicity and the negative reactions we've had to similar in the past - but I do like that it's more readable.

Author: Thank you @daxian-dbw - I'll adjust as you describe

If you don't provide a channel option, the command defaults to `-LTS`.

The `<scope option>` must be one of the following:

- `-AllUsers`
- `-CurrentUser`

If you don't provide a scope option, the command defaults to `-CurrentUser`.

Scope selection has an impact on receiving auto-updates from Microsoft Update:

- `-AllUsers` is an MSI-based installation with Microsoft Update enabled.
- `-CurrentUser` is a ZIP-based installation. Users will need to manually
  update when a new version is released.

## Demo.txt

- Install the latest LTS version by default.

  ```powershell
  install-powershell7 
  ```

- To install the latest LTS release of PowerShell over PowerShell Remoting:

  ```powershell
  Invoke-Command -Computername RemoteComputer1 -ScriptBlock {install-powershell7}
  ```

- Install the Stable release using the current user scope.

  ```powershell

>   install-powershell7 /Stable /CurrentUser

Reviewer: example needs to be updated.

- Updating of PowerShell (Update-PowerShell7)
- User selected versions prior to current (No version parameter)
- Disconnected scenarios - Users that are air-gapped may download the appropriate release from GitHub.
- Handling of additional MSI switch options - i.e. Enable PSRemoting
- Cross platform support
- Deployments at scale

## Specification

Command name: install-powershell7

The default behavior is to install the zip package silently to CurrentUser scope, with the latest LTS
release of PowerShell. If the user has administrative
privilege, they can choose to install the msi package silently to the scope of AllUsers.

- The stable package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell-Stable
  - If path exists, detect installed version and compare:
    - If versions equal: Provide an error "PowerShell 7 is already installed" and exit.
    - If versions not equal: Overwrite original installation.
- The preview package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell-Preview
  - If path exists, detect installed version and compare:
    - If versions equal: Provide an error "PowerShell 7 is already installed" and exit.

>     - If versions not equal: Overwrite original installation.

Author: @daxian-dbw / @SteveL-MSFT - Originally we talked about Microsoft\pwsh -- If Microsoft\PowerShell is not a good place, how about Stable: Microsoft\PowerShell-Stable and preview Microsoft\PowerShell-Preview -- Would LTS overwrite stable (and visa versa)?

Reviewer 2: I think AppData\Local\Programs\PowerShell and (PowerShell-Preview) would be the right place.  I see other apps putting themselves there already.  The only downside is that $env:PATH needs to be updated, but we were doing that anyways.

Reviewer: Agreed. This looks to be the right location to me.

Author: Thank you!

- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh
- The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers.
- The command should show a progress bar during the download and installation of PowerShell 7.
- The command should produce an error if the download location (US based url) fails.

The following parameters can be added by experienced PowerShell users to customize the installation.

- Parameter: Scope - overrides the default of CurrentUser and allows the user to specify the
  installation location AllUsers.
- Parameter: Channel - options Stable/Preview/LTS - allows the user to select if they want the
  current preview or LTS release.

## Syntax

The command `install-powershell7` is lower case and supports `-` or `--` parameters to be consistent
with other command-line tools.

```syntax
install-powershell7  [--channel <option>] [--scope <option>] [--force]
install-powershell7  [-c <option>] [-s <option>] [-f]
```

The `--channel <option>` must be one of the following:

> - `--channel preview`

Reviewer: Maybe it's worth writing to the RFC that for preview installations, the path to be put in $env:PATH should be `<path-to-preview-folder>\preview`. That's where the `pwsh-preview.cmd` command locates. We need to do this so that the user can differentiate between the stable installation and preview installation by running `pwsh` vs. `pwsh-preview`.

- Handling of additional MSI switch options - i.e. Enable PSRemoting
- Cross platform support

## Specification

Command name: install-powershell7

The default behavior is to install to CurrentUser scope, with the latest LTS
release of PowerShell. If the user has administrative
privilege, they can choose to install to the scope of AllUsers.

- The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh
  - If this path already exists, remove and replace.
- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh
- The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers.

The following parameters can be added by experienced PowerShell users to customize the installation.

- Parameter: Scope - overrides the default of CurrentUser and allows the user to specify the
  installation location AllUsers.
- Parameter: Channel - options Stable/Preview/LTS - allows the user to select if they want the
  current preview or LTS release.

## Syntax

The command `install-powershell7` is lower case and supports `-/--` switch options to be consistent
with other command-line tools.

```syntax
install-powershell7  [-channel <option>] [-scope <option>]
```

> The `--channel <option>` must be one of the following:

Reviewer 3: I don't like `--channel` for the name of this parameter. It can get confused with `$env:POWERSHELL_DISTRIBUTION_CHANNEL`. I prefer `--release`.

Author: Thanks @sdwheeler - Will discuss with Committee.

Reviewer 4: There is some precedence here with using channel for release version - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-install-script#options 

though the options for their channel are: STS, LTS, 8.0, 7.0, 6.0 etc.

they also have `quality` but that to me sounds incorrect for our usecase.

Reviewer: `--release` suggests you can specify a release version to install that specific release version.
We do call `LTS`, `Stable`, `Preview` channels in our doc, for example, in https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_update_notifications?view=powershell-7.3#long-description:
> The following endpoints are currently used for determining the latest version of **each channel**:

Author: The committee has agreed on "Channel"

- `--channel preview`
- `--channel stable`
- `--channel lts`

If you don't provide a channel option, the command defaults to `-channel lts`.

The `--scope <option>` must be one of the following:

- `--scope allusers`
- `--scope currentuser`

If you don't provide a scope option, the command defaults to `--scope currentuser`.

Scope selection has an impact on receiving auto-updates from Microsoft Update:

- `--scope allusers` is an MSI-based installation with Microsoft Update enabled.

> - `--scope currentuser` is a ZIP-based installation. Users will need to manually

Reviewer 3: Do we need to have a different `$env:POWERSHELL_DISTRIBUTION_CHANNEL` value for ZIP-based install?

Reviewer 4: We do not set a `POWERSHELL_DISTRIBUTION_CHANNEL` for ZIP based installs now, but we can add through our tool. There could be complications if there are multiple versions installed. For example, the enterprise has LTS deployed via MSI, but the employee installs preview via this tool. Do we overwrite the value?

Reviewer 4: Also, for MSI installs we might want to have a different value for distribution channel to signify MSI installed via InstallPowerShell7.exe

Author: This tool should not do anything with the PowerShell distribution channel.

Many IT customers of PowerShell face a problem in which they don't control the landscape of software
pre-installed on the Windows Servers they manage. Explicitly installing PowerShell is a blocker for
some customers due to discoverability and some that have policies that don't allow for installing
software onto Windows after initial provisioning.

To compensate for these situations, customers will implement and use the "tools at hand" to perform
management tasks. This leaves **Windows PowerShell 5.1**, not **PowerShell 7**, as the only
automation solution available to many of them. While customers are missing out on useful new
features that they may wish to have, they are certainly not receiving the performance and security
improvements that come with each new release.

This specification is an effort to help IT admins that wish to use new and updated releases of
PowerShell 7. While this may not help customers that have post-deployment policy restrictions, it
will help the majority of customers discover and update to the latest version of PowerShell for
Windows.

```
As an admin,
I can use Windows PowerShell 5.1 to provision multiple hosts with PowerShell 7 over PSRemoting,

> so that I can leverage new capabilities in PS7.

Reviewer 5: 200MB * 100 computers = 20GB will be downloaded directly from Internet. I'd prefer local cache.

Author: @iSazonov - Thank you for the comment. Deployments at scale are dependent on the customer infrastructure/apps and not a goal of this command.

 versions. So even if size was not an issue, we cannot check in a version of PS7 with a .NET that is
 not supported while Windows itself is supported.

### Solution

To solve these issues, the proposal is to ship a new command in Windows that would:

- Be locally discoverable
- Perform a simple download and install of the latest LTS release of PowerShell
- Include parameter options to select Stable, Preview, or LTS releases

## Goals/Non-Goals

Goals:

- By default, download and install the latest LTS release to the users CurrentUser Scope
  - CurrentUser - default installation scope location $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh. If the path
    exists, remove and replace.
  - AllUsers - Administrative users may explicit select this scope. AllUsers requires administrative
    elevation and performs a silent install using the MSI defaults.
- Allow users to use remoting for install at scale with Invoke-Command
- Allow advanced users to specify channel Stable/Preview/LTS

Non-goals:

- Removal of PowerShell (Remove-PowerShell7)
- Updating of PowerShell (Update-PowerShell7)
- User selected versions prior to current (No version parameter)

> - Disconnected scenarios - Users that are air-gapped may download the appropriate release from GitHub.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to worry about regions like China, EU, etc.. that may not have access to a US based Az blob URL?

Author: We need an error message+links to docs page.

Author: Add progress bar (message)  for download and install portion

- Handling of additional MSI switch options - i.e. Enable PSRemoting
- Cross platform support

## Specification

Command name: install-powershell7

The default behavior is to install to CurrentUser scope, with the latest LTS
release of PowerShell. If the user has administrative
privilege, they can choose to install to the scope of AllUsers.

- The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh

>   - If this path already exists, remove and replace.

Reviewer 6: what happens if the user types `install-powershell7` twice in a row, do we install, remove, install?

Author: Yes, we should detect the installed version and compare - if it's the same, report warning "Version XXX is already installed." The command should support --Force

>   - If this path already exists, remove and replace.

Author: yes - will include as above

>   - If this path already exists, remove and replace.

Author: Jason - the package location for stable is Microsoft\PowerShell, the preview version will be Microsoft\PowerShell-preview

>   - If this path already exists, remove and replace.

Author: @daxian-dbw / @SteveL-MSFT - Originally we talked about Microsoft\pwsh -- If Microsoft\PowerShell is not a good place, how about Stable: `Microsoft\PowerShell-Stable` and preview `Microsoft\PowerShell-Preview` -- Would LTS overwrite stable (and visa versa)?

>   - If this path already exists, remove and replace.

Reviewer: Why is `Microsoft\pwsh` a bad idea?

- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh

> - The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers.

Reviewer 2: Implication is that CurrentUser will be the zip and AllUsers the MSI, but silent install

automation solution available to many of them. While customers are missing out on useful new
features that they may wish to have, they are certainly not receiving the performance and security
improvements that come with each new release.

This specification is an effort to help IT admins that wish to use new and updated releases of
PowerShell 7. While this may not help customers that have post-deployment policy restrictions, it
will help the majority of customers discover and update to the latest version of PowerShell for
Windows.

```
As an admin,
I can use Windows PowerShell 5.1 to provision multiple hosts with PowerShell 7 over PSRemoting,
so that I can leverage new capabilities in PS7.
```

```
As a user,
I can discover and install PowerShell 7 from Windows PowerShell 5.1 or `cmd.exe` on my Windows machine,
so that I can leverage new capabilities in PS7.
```

Additional scenarios are enabled when considering a command versus a cmdlet. While Windows users
would find benefit and familiarity to a cmdlet, a command opens up scenarios where PowerShell is not
pre-installed. Additionally, several installation issues due to open files are avoided by using a

> command and closing any open sessions of PowerShell.

Author: agreed and added

## Shipping in Windows

There are several issues that prevent shipping PowerShell 7 in Windows:

- Size
- Support lifecycle differences

### Size constraints

 A complete installation of PowerShell 7 currently is around 200 MB (unpacked). This is due to
 including everything (modules and .NET assemblies) to provide parity with what Windows PowerShell
 5.1 with .NET Framework provides. There is currently no plan by Windows or the .NET team to ship
 newer .NET in Windows, so PS7 will need to continue to ship .NET with PS7.

### Support lifecycle

 Windows has a 5+5 year support lifecycle. .NET supports up to 3 years for Long Term Support (LTS)
 versions. So even if size was not an issue, we cannot check in a version of PS7 with a .NET that is
 not supported while Windows itself is supported.

### Solution

> To solve these issues, the proposal is to ship a new command in Windows and the PowerShell Gallery

Reviewer 3: That was supposed to be removed since this is a native command. @theJasonHelmick

> To solve these issues, the proposal is to ship a new command in Windows and the PowerShell Gallery

Reviewer: > ship a new command in Windows 

Do you mean in Windows and Windows Server?

> To solve these issues, the proposal is to ship a new command in Windows and the PowerShell Gallery

Author: Removed

that would:

- Be locally discoverable
- Perform a simple download and install of the latest LTS release of PowerShell
- Include parameter options to select Stable, Preview, or LTS releases

## Goals/Non-Goals

Goals:

- By default, download and install the latest LTS release to the users CurrentUser Scope
  - CurrentUser - default installation scope location $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh
  - AllUsers - Administrative users may explicit select this scope. AllUsers requires administrative
    elevation and performs a silent install using the MSI defaults.
- Allow users to use remoting for install at scale with Invoke-Command
- Allow advanced users to specify channel Stable/Preview/LTS

Non-goals:

- Removal of PowerShell (Remove-PowerShell7)

> - Updating of PowerShell (Update-PowerShell7)

Author: yes

- User selected versions prior to current (No version parameter)
- Disconnected scenarios - Users that are air-gapped may download the appropriate release from GitHub.
- Handling of additional MSI switch options - i.e. Enable PSRemoting
- Cross platform support

## Alternatives

`install-powershell7` cmdlet is an alternative approach that is more common to discover for a
Powershell user. The cmdlet approach increases the complexity of installing a new version of
PowerShell from an existing version. Additionally, The ability to bootstrap and install PowerShell
on a system that currently does not include Powershell is an added benefit for using a command.

> `install-powershell7` with -Scope CurrentUser installs PowerShell to $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh. The user may wish to specify a location for the installation with a parameter **Path**.

Reviewer: It looks this section can be removed, as it's decided to use a command-line tool in the latest RFC update.

Author: I agree, the decision to move away from a cmdlet is a needed technical one - so will remove the Alternatives section

## Specification

Command name: install-powershell7

The default behavior is to install to CurrentUser scope, with the latest LTS
release of PowerShell. If the user has administrative
privilege, they can choose to install to the scope of AllUsers.

> - The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh

Reviewer: If that directory already exists, shall the tool remove the existing folder first?

Author: added comment same here as above.  thank you

- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh
- The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers. 

The following parameters can be added by experienced PowerShell users to customize the installation.

- Parameter: Scope - overrides the default of CurrentUser and allows the user to specify the
  installation location AllUsers.
- Parameter: Channel - options Stable/Preview/LTS - allows the user to select if they want the
  current preview or LTS release.

## Syntax

The command `install-powershell7` is lower case and supports `/` switch options to be consistent

> with other command-line tools.

Reviewer: > supports `/` switch options to be consistent with other command-line tools.

I think we need to support the `-` and `--` switch options as it's more of a standard for command-line tools.
We can also support `/` switch options to be consistent with legacy Windows commands.
For example, `wt` (Windows Terminal) supports `-/--` and `/`, but it's help content only shows the `-/--` options (try `wt --help`). 
`wsl` (WSL command-line tool) supports `-/--` options only.

Reviewer 3: We talked about this and decided that was an implementation detail up to the developer.

The main idea is that we didn't want parameters with arguments. To keep it simple, it only uses mutually-exclusive option switches.

Reviewer: I think what form of options to support should be called out in the RFC. `-/--` options are obviously more consistent with modern command-line tools and should be the default.

The RFC should decide whether we want to support the `/` form or not. They are mainly for consistency with legacy Windows command-line tools. If it's up to the developer to decide, then it's likely `/` won't be supported because that's probably extra work.

Author: Thank you - I will change to -/--

```syntax
install-powershell7  [<channel option>] [<scope option>]
```

The `<channel option>` must be one of the following:

- `/Preview`
- `/Stable`

> - `/LTS`

Reviewer: > The main idea is that we didn't want parameters with arguments. To keep it simple, it only uses mutually-exclusive option switches.

I think it may be easier to implement options with arguments.

---
RFC: RFC00XX
Author: Jason Helmick
Status: Draft
SupercededBy: N/A
Version: 1.0
Area: Core
Comments Due: 6/30/2022
Plan to implement: Yes
---

# Install-PowerShell7 Command

> This RFC proposes the addition of the `Install-PowerShell7` command to perform a simplified

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes the addition of the `Install-PowerShell7` command to Windows to perform a simplified
```

installation of the latest Long Term Service (LTS) release of PowerShell 7. Options through

> parameters are provided to specify Stable, Preview, or Long Term Service (LTS) releases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
parameters are provided to specify Stable, Preview, or LTS releases.
```

pre-installed on the Windows Servers they manage. Explicitly installing PowerShell is a blocker for
some customers due to discoverability and some that have policies that don't allow for installing
software onto Windows after initial provisioning.

To compensate for these situations, customers will implement and use the "tools at hand" to perform
management tasks. This leaves **Windows PowerShell 5.1**, not **PowerShell 7**, as the only
automation solution available to many of them. While customers are missing out on useful new
features that they may wish to have, they are certainly not receiving the performance and security
improvements that come with each new release.

This specification is an effort to help IT admins that wish to use new and updated releases of
PowerShell 7. While this may not help customers that have post-deployment policy restrictions, it
will help the majority of customers discover and update to the latest version of PowerShell for
Windows.

```output
As an admin,
I can use Windows PowerShell 5.1 to provision multiple hosts with PowerShell 7 over PSRemoting,
so that I can leverage new capabilities in PS7.
```

> ```output

Reviewer 3: ~~~suggestion
```
~~~

As a user,

> I can discover and install PowerShell 7 from Windows PowerShell 5.1 on my Windows machine,

Author: Yes, I will adjust to include cmd

so that I can leverage new capabilities in PS7.
```

Additional scenarios are enabled when considering a command versus a cmdlet. While Windows users

> would find benefit and familiarity to a cmdlet, a command opens up scenarios where Powershell is not

Author: ```suggestion
would find benefit and familiarity to a cmdlet, a command opens up scenarios where PowerShell is not
```

pre-installed. Additionally, several installation issues due to open files are avoided by using a
command and closing any open sessions of PowerShell.

## Shipping in Windows

> There are several issues that prevent shipping PowerShell 7 in Windows;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are several issues that prevent shipping PowerShell 7 in Windows:
```

- Size
- Support lifecycle differences

### Size constraints

 A complete installation of PowerShell 7 currently is around 200 MB (unpacked). This is due to
 including everything (modules and .NET assemblies) to provide parity with what Windows PowerShell
 5.1 with .NET Framework provides. There is currently no plan by Windows or the .NET team to ship
 newer .NET in Windows, so PS7 will need to continue to ship .NET with PS7.

### Support lifecycle

 Windows has a 5+5 year support lifecycle. .NET supports up to 3 years for Long Term Support (LTS)
 versions. So even if size was not an issue, we cannot check in a version of PS7 with a .NET that is
 not supported while Windows itself is supported.

### Solution

To solve these issues, the proposal is to ship a new command in Windows and the PowerShell Gallery

> that would;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that would:
```

- Be locally discoverable
- Perform a simple download and install of the latest LTS release of PowerShell

> - Include parameter options to select Stable,Preview or Long Term Service releases

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Include parameter options to select Stable, Preview, or LTS releases
```

## Goals/Non-Goals

Goals:

> - Be locally discoverable, not only an artifact on PSGallery.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - Be locally discoverable, not only an artifact on PSGallery.

Reviewer 3: Can we publish commands (non-modules) to the Gallery? What about Winget?

Author: My understanding is that we can't today publish commands to the Gallery

> - By default, download and install the latest LTS release to the users CurrentUser Scope

Reviewer 3: Where would PS7 install for CurrentUser scope? AppData? ProgramData?

If so, that adds complexity for the docs regarding `$PSHOME`.

Reviewer 3: None of our install methods have a standard install for "CurrentUser". This tool would need to establish a new installation standard for "CurrentUser". We need this standardized so that we can document it.

Author: CurrentUser - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh

  - CurrentUser - default installation scope

>   - AllUsers - Administrative users may explicit select this scope

Reviewer 3: Will this require elevation to install?

Author: Yes - Allusers requires elevation
I

- Allow users to use remoting for install at scale with Invoke-Command
- Allow advanced users to specify channel Stable/Preview/LTS

Non-goals:

- Removal of PowerShell (Remove-PowerShell7)
- Updating of PowerShell (Update-PowerShell7)
- User selected versions prior to current (No version parameter)
- Disconnected scenarios - Users that are air-gapped may download the appropriate release from GitHub.
- Handling of additional MSI switch options - i.e. Enable PSRemoting
- Cross platform support

## Alternatives

`Install-PowerShell7` cmdlet is an alternative approach that is more common to discover for a
Powershell user. The cmdlet approach increases the complexity of installing a new version of
PowerShell from an existing version. Additionally, The ability to bootstrap and install PowerShell
on a system that currently does not include Powershell is an added benefit for using a command.

## Specification

Command name: Install-PowerShell7

> The default behavior is to download and extract the .ZIP package, then install the latest LTS

Author: ```suggestion
The default behavior is to install to CurrentUser scope, with the latest LTS
```

> release of PowerShell into the user scope allowed by permissions. If the user has administrative

Author: ```suggestion
release of PowerShell. If the user has administrative
```

privilege, they can choose to install to the scope of AllUsers.

- The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh

>   - Downloaded packages should be certificate signature verified before installation. 

Author: ```suggestion
  - Zip downloaded packages should be certificate signature verified before installation. 
```

Author: @theJasonHelmick - remove the two sub bullets

>   - Downloaded packages should be certificate signature verified before installation. 
>   - Failure of the signature should return an error message and stop performing installation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh

> - The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers. Due to permission requirements,
>   the scope CurrentUser will require manual updating.

Author: ```suggestion
- The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers. 
```

The following parameters can be added by experienced PowerShell users to customize the installation.

- Parameter: Scope - overrides the default of CurrentUser and allows the user to specify the
  installation location AllUsers.
- Parameter: Channel - options Stable/Preview/LTS - allows the user to select if they want the
  current preview or LTS release. 

## Syntax and Parameter Sets

> 

Author: @theJasonHelmick - Remove the facade of PowerShell cmdlet and spin as cmd.
ex. 
```
Install-PowerShell7 -Channel Stable -Scope CurrentUser 
InstallPowerShell7.exe  /stable /currentuser
```

>   current preview or Long Term Service (LTS) release. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  current preview or LTS release. 
```

> The syntax of the command is intentionally made similar to that of a cmdlet. Powershell users are
> familiar with a cmdlet syntax and will find this command similar in experience.

Author: ```suggestion
```
@theJasonHelmick - no longer relevant - please remove

> 

Reviewer 3: Parameter named sets apply to cmdlets not native commands. Is there more than one set? It appears that all parameters are available in the single parameter set. So no need to distinguish between sets when there is only one.

Author: thank you @sdwheeler -- with the changes to native command this no longer is needed.

### ParameterSet Channel (Default)

> ```output

Reviewer 3: ~~~suggestion
```
~~~

Install-PowerShell7 -Channel {Preview | LTS | Stable} [-Scope {AllUsers | CurrentUser}] [-TrustMicrosoftPublisher]
```

> The **Channel** parameter has the following validation attribute:

Reviewer 3: **Channel** has a different meaning in PowerShell already. PowerShell has the `$env:POWERSHELL_DISTRIBUTION_CHANNEL` variable. I think something like **Release** would be more appropriate.

Author: I agree that we might want to use a different name - I would caution against `release` as it may be understood to support version.  

Should this installer have unique installation channel variables?

[ValidateSet("Preview", "LTS", "Stable")]

The **Scope** parameter has the following validation attribute:
[ValidateSet("AllUsers", "CurrentUser")]

> 

Reviewer 3: These ValidateSet syntaxes only apply to cmdlets, not native commands. Just document that the parameters only accept those values.

Author: thank you @sdwheeler -- with the change to native command this no longer applies.

Scope specifies the installation scope of the module. The default installation scope is CurrentUser,
which does not require elevation. Users may choose to select the AllUsers scope, which requires
elevation.

Scope selection has an impact on receiving auto-updates from Microsoft Update:

> - AllUsers for x86/x64 will auto-update via Microsoft Update.

Reviewer 3: If you are installing from the ZIP package, how is MU enabled? Which proc-type will be installed x86/x64/arm64? What if I want both 32- and 64-bit?

Author: Zip is addressed earlier in the rfc.  Proc type: The installer should install the systems default proc type only.

  - Note, on arm64 there is no AllUsers
- CurrentUser is manually updated

> The **TrustMicrosoftPublisher** is required for installation on Windows. Powershell packages are

Reviewer 3: Why is this needed? We don't need this for MSI installs?

Author: @TravisEz13 - If the installation is MSI based for Allusers, zip based for CurrentUser - is the TrustMicrosoftPublisher still required?

signed with a Microsoft certificate, not the Windows certificate. When enabled, this parameter
should enable the publishers content for this session.

### Data model

The `Install-PowerShell7` command provide useful information post installation. The data model for

> the output is below;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the output is below.
```

> ### Data model
> 
> The `Install-PowerShell7` command provide useful information post installation. The data model for
> the output is below.
> 
> ```output
> PSTypename   = "PSInstallationInfo"
> [Version]Version      = $version
> [string]Path         = (Get-Command pwsh).source
> [string]Channel      = if ($Channel) { $channel} else {"LTS" }
> [string]Computername = $env:COMPUTERNAME
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```
@theJasonHelmick - The change to native command means we no longer need the data model.  Command should not return anything - should set exit code.

## Demo.txt

- Install the latest LTS version by default.

  ```powershell
  install-powershell7 
  ```

  ```output
  Version Path                                   Channel Computername
  ------- ----                                   ------- ------------
  7.2.0   C:\Program Files\PowerShell\7\pwsh.exe LTS  
  ```

- To install the latest LTS release of PowerShell over PowerShell Remoting:

  ```powershell
  Invoke-Command -Computername RemoteComputer1 -ScriptBlock {Install-PowerShell7}
  ```

- Install the Stable release using the current user scope.

  ```powershell

>   Install-PowerShell7 -Channel Stable -Scope CurrentUser -Passthru

Reviewer 3: There is no **PassThru** parameter defined above.

---
RFC: RFC00XX
Author: Jason Helmick
Status: Draft
SupercededBy: N/A
Version: 1.0
Area: Core
Comments Due: 6/30/2022
Plan to implement: Yes
---

# Install-PowerShell7 Cmdlet for Windows

> This RFC proposes the addition of the `Install-PowerShell7` cmdlet and new `PowerShell7` module for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes is the addition of the `Install-PowerShell7` cmdlet and new `PowerShell7` module for
```

Author: I think the original reads better - so not accepting this suggestion

Reviewer: My bas, I read `proposes` as `process` :)

 5.1 with .NET Framework provides. There is currently no plan by Windows or the .NET team to ship
 newer .NET in Windows, so PS7 will need to continue to ship .NET with PS7.

### Support lifecycle

 Windows has a 5+5 year support lifecycle. .NET supports up to 3 years for Long Term Support (LTS)
 versions. So even if size was not an issue, we cannot check in a version of PS7 with a .NET that is
 not supported while Windows itself is supported.

### Solution

To solve these issues, the proposal is to ship a new cmdlet in Windows and the PowerShell Gallery
that would;

- Be discoverable using normal PowerShell conventions
- Perform a simple download and install of the latest stable release of PowerShell
- Provide advanced options with parameters;
  - Specific version
  - Stable, Preview or LTS
  - Scope - location of installation based on permissions

## Goals/Non-Goals

Goals:

- Be discoverable as other built-in cmdlets
- By default, download and install the latest stable release to the users CurrentUser Scope
  - CurrentUser - default installation scope
  - AllUsers - Administrative users may explicit select this scope

> - Allow users to use remoting for install at scale with Invoke-Command

Reviewer 7: The ConfirmImpact == High may prevent unattended use (need to check).  May need a `-Force`.

- Allow advanced users to specify the version of PowerShell
- Allow advanced users to specify scope (location of installation)
- Allow advanced users to specify channel Stable/Preview/LTS
- Users should receive a warning to continue the installation (ConfirmImpact=High)

Non-goals:

- Removal of PowerShell (Remove-PowerShell7)
- Updating of PowerShell (Update-PowerShell7)
- Disconnect scenarios - Users that are air-gapped may download the appropriate release from GitHub.
- Handling of additional MSI switch options - i.e. Enable PSRemoting

## Specification

Cmdlet name: Install-PowerShell7

Alias: None

The default behavior is to download and extract the .ZIP package, then install the latest stable

> release of PowerShell into the user scope allowed by permissions. If administrative privilege,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
release of PowerShell into the user scope allowed by permissions. If with administrative privilege,
```

install to the scope of AllUsers. If user does not have administrative privilege, install to the
scope CurrentUser.

> - The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell

Reviewer: Today, both Windows PowerShell and powershell core already use this location for storing configuration and cache files, including the module analysis cache, startup profile data, telemetry uuid file, update notification cache files, secrete management vault registration files, scheduled job cache files, and maybe more.

So we need to choose a different location for PowerShell installation. Maybe `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\PowerShell` or `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh`.

Author: If no one disagrees, then remaining closer to consistency with existing is my preference - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\pwsh.  I'll add to RFC.

> - The package install location - $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell

Reviewer 2: This would have to be `PowerShell` and `PowerShell-Preview` similar to what we do with our MSI installer.  However, I don't think we have a `PowerShell-LTS` folder so it would clobber the `PowerShell` stable install.

- The installer should update the Users PATH for pwsh
- The installer should enable Microsoft Updates for scope AllUsers. Due to permission requirements,

>   the scope CurrentUser will require manual updating.

Reviewer: How the manual updating will be done by a user? I presume running `Install-PowerShell7` again would remove the current `CurrentUser` installation and re-install to that location, is that the case?

Author: Yes, thats one scenario - the user may also have Wsus, SCCM or other updating tools they could use.

- Confirm impact should be set to **High** to force a warning and the ability to abort

The following parameters can be added by experienced PowerShell users to customize the installation.

- Parameter: Version - overrides the default and allows the user to specify the version of
  PowerShell that will be installed. PowerShell version 7.0 and 7.1 are out of support, so version

>   numbers should begin with 7.2. This would install the latest 7.2.x.

Reviewer: The cmdlet needs a way tell what versions are under support and what versions have reached EOL. So, when 7.2 reaches EOL, it throws error when specifying 7.2.

Author: This is a good point that I had not planned for.  Is there something like a tag on GitHub that we can check?

Reviewer: I don't think currently there is a way to tell this programmatically. How is this tracked by our docs?

Author: Manual effort

Author: Today, Travis provides a micro-service that helps us update EOL.  Install-PowerShell could consume this information. The cmdlet can provide a warning or error if a version is out of support.  The bigger question is if we support -version (for Ci scenarios) then we would need to support version that are EOL.  If we don't believe this cmdlet should be used for ci scenarios, then we could remove -version and not provide unsupported version.  We could try to be more like docker, 30 days before the EOL, users would start getting a warning, after EOL, the image will be unavailable and user would receive an error.  This brings us back to a scope discussion - this cmdlet was intended for Windows users to upgrade to the latest stable - I think that is equivalent to WinGet.  I suggest we don't exceed the capabilities for WinGet, which means not supporting ci scenarios and removing the -version parameter.  I recommend at minimum the LTS, Stable, preview

Author: After having several discussions - focusing the cmdlet on a simple installation of Stable, Preview and LTS only.  Removing Version.  The cmdlet should install only the latest available.

> - Parameter: Scope - overrides the default and allows the user to specify the installation location

Reviewer 2: Should be clear that scope AllUsers will use the MSI (and should enable MU) while CurrentUser uses the zip package

Reviewer 2: win-arm64 doesn't have a MSI pkg so it would have to be the MSIX pkg

Reviewer 2: In this spec I think the changes that need to be called out:

- on x64 AllUsers, PS7 will be auto-updated via MU
- on arm64 there is no AllUsers
- for any CurrentUser install, it is manually updated

Reviewer 2: Should specify that any pkg being downloaded needs the sig verified and what happens if it fails

Reviewer 2: Note that our pkgs are signed with Microsoft Cert and not Windows Cert and isn't trusted by default by Windows, so we need to probably have a `-TrustMicrosoftPublisher` type of switch otherwise is prompted.

Author: Added all points

  (scope) AllUsers or CurrentUser.
- Parameter: Channel - options Stable/Preview/LTS - allows the user to select if they want the
  current preview or Long Term Service (LTS) release. Preview should not be allowed if value of

>   parameter **-Version** is Generally Available (GA).

Reviewer: It's a little confusing here. `-Version` and `-Channel` are in 2 different parameter sets, right?

Author: I see what you mean -- I'll clarify.

- Parameter: Passthru - to provide informative output post installation

## Syntax and Parameter Sets

### ParameterSet Version (Default)

```
Install-PowerShell7 [[-Version] <string>] [-Scope {AllUsers | CurrentUsers}] [-Passthru] [-WhatIf] [-Confirm]  [<CommonParameters>]
```

### ParameterSet Channel

```

> Install-PowerShell7 -Channel {Preview | LTS | Stable} [-Scope {AllUsers | CurrentUser}] [-Passthru] [-WhatIf] [-Confirm]

Reviewer 6: couldn't there be multiple versions of a channel?

Author: For simplification and to remove the need for versions, the installation of a channel should be the latest version at the time of execution.

[<CommonParameters>]
```

The **Version** parameter has the following validation attribute: [ValidatePattern("^7\.\d+")]

The **Channel** parameter has the following validation attribute: [ValidateSet("Preview", "LTS", "Stable")]

The **Scope** parameter has the following validation attribute: [ValidateSet("AllUsers", "CurrentUser")]

### Data model

The `Install-PowerShell7` cmdlet should support the **Passthru** parameter to provide useful
information post installation. The data model for the output is below;

```output
PSTypename   = "PSInstallationInfo"
[Version]Version      = $version
[string]Path         = (Get-Command pwsh).source
[string]Channel      = if ($Channel) { $channel} else {"Stable" }
[string]Computername = $env:COMPUTERNAME
```

> ## Demo.txt

Reviewer 2: What is the failure experience if running `Install-PowerShell7` and pwsh.exe is already in use so it can't be overwritten?

Author: Resolved by changing from cmdlet to command.

- Install the latest stable version by default.

  ```powershell

>   install-powershell7 -Passthru

Reviewer 7: Should this be `-Verbose` rather than `-Passthru` ?

  Version Path                                   Channel Computername
  ------- ----                                   ------- ------------
  7.2.3   C:\Program Files\PowerShell\7\pwsh.exe Stable
  ```

- To install the latest stable release of PowerShell over PowerShell Remoting:

  ```powershell
  Invoke-Command -Computername RemoteComputer1 -ScriptBlock {Install-PowerShell7}
  ```

- Install the LTS release using the current user scope.

  ```powershell
  Install-PowerShell7 -Passthru -Channel LTS -Scope CurrentUser
  ```

  ```
  Version Path                                   Channel Computername
  ------- ----                                   ------- ------------
  7.2.0   C:\Users\jeff\PowerShell\7\pwsh.exe    LTS     RemoteComp
  ```

- To install the latest stable release of PowerShell:

  ```powershell
  Install-PowerShell7
  ```

- To install a specific version of a PowerShell release:

  ```powershell
  Install-PowerShell7 -Version 7.2
  ```

- To install a specific version of a PowerShell release to a specific scope:

  ```powershell
  Install-PowerShell7 -Version 7.2 -Scope Allusers
  ```

- To install the latest preview from a specific version:

  ```powershell

>   Install-PowerShell7 -Version 7.3 -Channel 'Preview'

Reviewer 6: couple of questions:
- will the msi/msix/zip file removed (and will we check a signature?)
- there may be situations where the file can't be downloaded (or installed after downloading) what will those errors look like?
- are there other error conditions which should be enumerated?
